gadgets/trace_exec/README.mdx, before:

---
title: trace_exec
sidebar_position: 0
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# trace_exec

The trace_exec gadget notifies when new processes are executed.

## Requirements

- Minimum Kernel Version : 5.4

## Getting started

Running the gadget:

<Tabs groupId="env">
    <TabItem value="kubectl-gadget" label="kubectl gadget">
        ```bash
        $ kubectl gadget run ghcr.io/inspektor-gadget/gadget/trace_exec:%IG_TAG% [flags]
        ```
    </TabItem>

    <TabItem value="ig" label="ig">
        ```bash
        $ sudo ig run ghcr.io/inspektor-gadget/gadget/trace_exec:%IG_TAG% [flags]
        ```
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>
## Flags

### `--ignore-failed`

Ignore failed events

Default value: "true"

### `--paths`

Show current working directory, file path and executable path. The file path and executable path might be different in case of a script.

Default value: "false"

### `--uid`

Show only events generated by processes with this uid

Default value: ""

## Guide

First, we need to run an application that generates some events.

<Tabs groupId="env">
    <TabItem value="kubectl-gadget" label="kubectl gadget">
        ```bash
        $ kubectl run --restart=Never --image=busybox myapp1-pod --labels="name=myapp1-pod,myapp=app-one,role=demo" -- sh -c 'while /bin/true ; do date ; cat /proc/version ; /bin/sleep 1 ; done'
        pod/myapp1-pod created
        $ kubectl run --restart=Never --image=busybox myapp2-pod --labels="name=myapp2-pod,myapp=app-two,role=demo" -- sh -c 'while /bin/true ; do date ; /bin/echo sleep-10 ; /bin/sleep 10 ; done'
        pod/myapp2-pod created

        $ kubectl get pod --show-labels -o wide
        NAME         READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE   IP            NODE              NOMINATED NODE   READINESS GATES   LABELS
        myapp1-pod   1/1     Running   0          83s   10.244.0.26   minikube-docker   <none>           <none>            myapp=app-one,name=myapp1-pod,role=demo
        myapp2-pod   1/1     Running   0          68s   10.244.0.27   minikube-docker   <none>           <none>            myapp=app-two,name=myapp2-pod,role=demo
            ```
    </TabItem>

    <TabItem value="ig" label="ig">
        ```bash
        $ docker run --name test-trace-exec -d --rm busybox /bin/sh -c 'while /bin/true ; do whoami ; /bin/sleep 3 ; done'
        ```
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>

Then, let's run the gadget:

<Tabs groupId="env">
    <TabItem value="kubectl-gadget" label="kubectl gadget">
        Using the trace_exec gadget, we can see which new processes are spawned on node
        `minikube-docker` where `myapp1-pod` and `myapp2-pod` are running:

        ```bash
        $ kubectl gadget run trace_exec:%IG_TAG% --selector role=demo --node minikube-docker
        K8S.NODE            K8S.NAMESPACE               K8S.PODNAME                 K8S.CONTAINERNAME           COMM                        PID            TID PCOMM                    PPID ARGS           ERR… USER           LOGINUSER      GROUP
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  true                    2957112        2957112 sh                    2589510 /bin/true           root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  date                    2957113        2957113 sh                    2589510 /bin/date           root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  cat                     2957114        2957114 sh                    2589510 /bin/cat /pro…      root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  sleep                   2957115        2957115 sh                    2589510 /bin/sleep 1        root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  true                    2957116        2957116 sh                    2589510 /bin/true           root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  date                    2957117        2957117 sh                    2589510 /bin/date           root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  cat                     2957118        2957118 sh                    2589510 /bin/cat /pro…      root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  sleep                   2957119        2957119 sh                    2589510 /bin/sleep 1        root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp2-pod                  myapp2-pod                  true                    2957120        2957120 sh                    2589903 /bin/true           root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp2-pod                  myapp2-pod                  date                    2957121        2957121 sh                    2589903 /bin/date           root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp2-pod                  myapp2-pod                  echo                    2957122        2957122 sh                    2589903 /bin/echo sle…      root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp2-pod                  myapp2-pod                  sleep                   2957123        2957123 sh                    2589903 /bin/sleep 10       root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  true                    2957124        2957124 sh                    2589510 /bin/true           root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  date                    2957125        2957125 sh                    2589510 /bin/date           root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  cat                     2957126        2957126 sh                    2589510 /bin/cat /pro…      root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  sleep                   2957127        2957127 sh                    2589510 /bin/sleep 1        root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  true                    2957147        2957147 sh                    2589510 /bin/true           root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  date                    2957148        2957148 sh                    2589510 /bin/date           root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  cat                     2957149        2957149 sh                    2589510 /bin/cat /pro…      root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  sleep                   2957150        2957150 sh                    2589510 /bin/sleep 1        root           uid:4294967295 root
        ^C
        ```

        Processes of both pods are spawned: `myapp1-pod` spawns `cat /proc/version` and `/bin/sleep 1`,
        `myapp2-pod` spawns `/bin/echo sleep-10` and `/bin/sleep 10`, both spawn `true` and `date`.
        We can stop to trace again by hitting Ctrl-C.

    </TabItem>

    <TabItem value="ig" label="ig">
        ```bash
        $ sudo ig run trace_exec:%IG_TAG% --containername test-trace-exec
        RUNTIME.CONTAINERNAME           COMM                            PID              TID PCOMM                        PPID ARGS             ERROR USER             LOGINUSER        GROUP
        test-trace-exec                 true                        2920998          2920998 sh                        2920573 /bin/true              root             uid:4294967295   root
        test-trace-exec                 whoami                      2920999          2920999 sh                        2920573 /bin/whoami            root             uid:4294967295   root
        test-trace-exec                 sleep                       2921000          2921000 sh                        2920573 /bin/sleep 3           root             uid:4294967295   root
        ^C
        ```
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>

Finally, clean the system:

<Tabs groupId="env">
    <TabItem value="kubectl-gadget" label="kubectl gadget">
        ```bash
        $ kubectl delete pod myapp1-pod myapp2-pod
        ```
    </TabItem>

    <TabItem value="ig" label="ig">
        ```bash
        $ docker rm -f test-trace-exec
        ```
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Limitations

- The upper layer field is only available when the executable is executed
 correctly (ret=0). For example, if the executable does not have the "execute"
 permission, the execution will fail and the upper layer field will not be
 defined.
- The file path might not be set when the execution fails (ret!=0), depending
 on the error.
- The exepath is set to the current process and not the new process when the
 execution fails (ret!=0).

Commit message:

docs: Update trace_exec gadget description and Add use cases
Signed-off-by: ThePhatak <111195860+uddhavphatak@users.noreply.github.com>

gadgets/trace_exec/README.mdx, after:

---
title: trace_exec
sidebar_position: 0
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# trace_exec

The trace_exec gadget notifies when new processes are executed.

## Description 

This gadget tracks all executed binaries on a node or within containers. It helps monitor process execution events in real-time, providing details like process name, arguments, and whether the binary was modified (using the Upper_Layer field).

## Use Cases

### Security Monitoring
- Detect unfamiliar or unauthorized binaries.
- Flags modified programs via the Upper_Layer field (e.g.. injected malware).

### Threat Detection
- Spot unexpected or suspicious execution patterns inside containers.

### Compliance Auditing
- Maintain execution logs for auditing;
- Verify binaries are from trusted container layer

### DevSecOps
- Detect accidental debug tools (e.g., gdb, strace) in production and enforce runtime policies.

### Debugging & Troubleshooting
- Debug application errors caused by missing or restricted files.
- Investigate unexpected file access patterns.

## Requirements

- Minimum Kernel Version : 5.4

## Getting started

Running the gadget:

<Tabs groupId="env">
    <TabItem value="kubectl-gadget" label="kubectl gadget">
        ```bash
        $ kubectl gadget run ghcr.io/inspektor-gadget/gadget/trace_exec:%IG_TAG% [flags]
        ```
    </TabItem>

    <TabItem value="ig" label="ig">
        ```bash
        $ sudo ig run ghcr.io/inspektor-gadget/gadget/trace_exec:%IG_TAG% [flags]
        ```
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>
## Flags

### `--ignore-failed`

Ignore failed events

Default value: "true"

### `--paths`

Show current working directory, file path and executable path. The file path and executable path might be different in case of a script.

Default value: "false"

### `--uid`

Show only events generated by processes with this uid

Default value: ""

## Guide

First, we need to run an application that generates some events.

<Tabs groupId="env">
    <TabItem value="kubectl-gadget" label="kubectl gadget">
        ```bash
        $ kubectl run --restart=Never --image=busybox myapp1-pod --labels="name=myapp1-pod,myapp=app-one,role=demo" -- sh -c 'while /bin/true ; do date ; cat /proc/version ; /bin/sleep 1 ; done'
        pod/myapp1-pod created
        $ kubectl run --restart=Never --image=busybox myapp2-pod --labels="name=myapp2-pod,myapp=app-two,role=demo" -- sh -c 'while /bin/true ; do date ; /bin/echo sleep-10 ; /bin/sleep 10 ; done'
        pod/myapp2-pod created

        $ kubectl get pod --show-labels -o wide
        NAME         READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE   IP            NODE              NOMINATED NODE   READINESS GATES   LABELS
        myapp1-pod   1/1     Running   0          83s   10.244.0.26   minikube-docker   <none>           <none>            myapp=app-one,name=myapp1-pod,role=demo
        myapp2-pod   1/1     Running   0          68s   10.244.0.27   minikube-docker   <none>           <none>            myapp=app-two,name=myapp2-pod,role=demo
            ```
    </TabItem>

    <TabItem value="ig" label="ig">
        ```bash
        $ docker run --name test-trace-exec -d --rm busybox /bin/sh -c 'while /bin/true ; do whoami ; /bin/sleep 3 ; done'
        ```
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>

Then, let's run the gadget:

<Tabs groupId="env">
    <TabItem value="kubectl-gadget" label="kubectl gadget">
        Using the trace_exec gadget, we can see which new processes are spawned on node
        `minikube-docker` where `myapp1-pod` and `myapp2-pod` are running:

        ```bash
        $ kubectl gadget run trace_exec:%IG_TAG% --selector role=demo --node minikube-docker
        K8S.NODE            K8S.NAMESPACE               K8S.PODNAME                 K8S.CONTAINERNAME           COMM                        PID            TID PCOMM                    PPID ARGS           ERR… USER           LOGINUSER      GROUP
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  true                    2957112        2957112 sh                    2589510 /bin/true           root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  date                    2957113        2957113 sh                    2589510 /bin/date           root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  cat                     2957114        2957114 sh                    2589510 /bin/cat /pro…      root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  sleep                   2957115        2957115 sh                    2589510 /bin/sleep 1        root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  true                    2957116        2957116 sh                    2589510 /bin/true           root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  date                    2957117        2957117 sh                    2589510 /bin/date           root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  cat                     2957118        2957118 sh                    2589510 /bin/cat /pro…      root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  sleep                   2957119        2957119 sh                    2589510 /bin/sleep 1        root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp2-pod                  myapp2-pod                  true                    2957120        2957120 sh                    2589903 /bin/true           root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp2-pod                  myapp2-pod                  date                    2957121        2957121 sh                    2589903 /bin/date           root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp2-pod                  myapp2-pod                  echo                    2957122        2957122 sh                    2589903 /bin/echo sle…      root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp2-pod                  myapp2-pod                  sleep                   2957123        2957123 sh                    2589903 /bin/sleep 10       root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  true                    2957124        2957124 sh                    2589510 /bin/true           root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  date                    2957125        2957125 sh                    2589510 /bin/date           root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  cat                     2957126        2957126 sh                    2589510 /bin/cat /pro…      root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  sleep                   2957127        2957127 sh                    2589510 /bin/sleep 1        root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  true                    2957147        2957147 sh                    2589510 /bin/true           root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  date                    2957148        2957148 sh                    2589510 /bin/date           root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  cat                     2957149        2957149 sh                    2589510 /bin/cat /pro…      root           uid:4294967295 root
        minikube-docker     default                     myapp1-pod                  myapp1-pod                  sleep                   2957150        2957150 sh                    2589510 /bin/sleep 1        root           uid:4294967295 root
        ^C
        ```

        Processes of both pods are spawned: `myapp1-pod` spawns `cat /proc/version` and `/bin/sleep 1`,
        `myapp2-pod` spawns `/bin/echo sleep-10` and `/bin/sleep 10`, both spawn `true` and `date`.
        We can stop to trace again by hitting Ctrl-C.

    </TabItem>

    <TabItem value="ig" label="ig">
        ```bash
        $ sudo ig run trace_exec:%IG_TAG% --containername test-trace-exec
        RUNTIME.CONTAINERNAME           COMM                            PID              TID PCOMM                        PPID ARGS             ERROR USER             LOGINUSER        GROUP
        test-trace-exec                 true                        2920998          2920998 sh                        2920573 /bin/true              root             uid:4294967295   root
        test-trace-exec                 whoami                      2920999          2920999 sh                        2920573 /bin/whoami            root             uid:4294967295   root
        test-trace-exec                 sleep                       2921000          2921000 sh                        2920573 /bin/sleep 3           root             uid:4294967295   root
        ^C
        ```
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>

Finally, clean the system:

<Tabs groupId="env">
    <TabItem value="kubectl-gadget" label="kubectl gadget">
        ```bash
        $ kubectl delete pod myapp1-pod myapp2-pod
        ```
    </TabItem>

    <TabItem value="ig" label="ig">
        ```bash
        $ docker rm -f test-trace-exec
        ```
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Limitations

- The upper layer field is only available when the executable is executed
 correctly (ret=0). For example, if the executable does not have the "execute"
 permission, the execution will fail and the upper layer field will not be
 defined.
- The file path might not be set when the execution fails (ret!=0), depending
 on the error.
- The exepath is set to the current process and not the new process when the
 execution fails (ret!=0).
