gadgets/fsnotify/README.mdx, before:

---
title: fsnotify
sidebar_position: 0
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# fsnotify

The fsnotify gadget detects applications using inotify or fanotify and enriches the events with the process-related metadata.

This gadget requires Linux >= 5.4. Additionally, the field `i_ino` is only available in Linux >= 5.11.

## Requirements

- Minimum Kernel Version : 5.4

## Getting started

Running the gadget:

<Tabs groupId="env">
    <TabItem value="kubectl-gadget" label="kubectl gadget">
        ```bash
        $ kubectl gadget run ghcr.io/inspektor-gadget/gadget/fsnotify:%IG_TAG% [flags]
        ```
    </TabItem>

    <TabItem value="ig" label="ig">
        ```bash
        $ sudo ig run ghcr.io/inspektor-gadget/gadget/fsnotify:%IG_TAG% [flags]
        ```
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>
## Flags

### `--fanotify-only`

Show only fanotify events

Default value: ""

### `--inotify-only`

Show only inotify events

Default value: ""

### `--tracee-pid`

Show only fsnotify events generated by processes with this pid

Default value: ""

### `--tracer-group`

Show only fsnotify events generated by a struct fsnotify_group with this address. You can find this address in Golang with kfilefields.ReadPrivateDataFromFd(). See https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/inspektor-gadget/inspektor-gadget/pkg/kfilefields#ReadPrivateDataFromFd

Default value: ""

### `--tracer-pid`

Show only fsnotify events generated for processes with this pid

Default value: ""

## Guide

### Example with inotify

Start an application using inotify:
```bash
inotifywatch /tmp/
```

You can generate events in another terminal with:
```bash
touch /tmp/ABCDE
```

The fsnotify gadget can observe and enrich the inotify events in the following way:
```bash
$ sudo ig run ghcr.io/inspektor-gadget/gadget/fsnotify:%IG_TAG% --inotify-only --fields=tracer_comm,tracee_comm,i_mask,name
TRACER_COMM    TRACEE_COMM   I_MASK      NAME
inotifywatch   touch         0x8000020   ABCDE
inotifywatch   touch         0x8000004   ABCDE
inotifywatch   touch         0x8000008   ABCDE
```

The mask uses the same flags as inotify (`IN_ACCESS`, etc.) + some internal ones:
```bash
134217760 = 0x08000020 = FS_OPEN | FS_EVENT_ON_CHILD
134217732 = 0x08000004 = FS_ATTRIB | FS_EVENT_ON_CHILD
134217736 = 0x08000008 = FS_CLOSE_WRITE | FS_EVENT_ON_CHILD
```

### Example with fanotify

ig itself uses fanotify to watch containers. You can generate events in another terminal with:
```bash
docker run -ti --rm busybox date
```

The fsnotify gadget can observe and enrich the fanotify events in the following way:
```bash
$ sudo ig run ghcr.io/inspektor-gadget/gadget/fsnotify:%IG_TAG% --fanotify-only --fields=tracer_comm,tracee_comm,type,fa_type,fa_response,name
TRACER_COMM  TRACEE_COMM      TYPE       FA_TYPE                         FA_RESPONSE   NAME
ig           containerd-shim  fanotify   FANOTIFY_EVENT_TYPE_PATH_PERM   na            /usr/bin/runc
ig           containerd-shim  fa_resp    FANOTIFY_EVENT_TYPE_PATH_PERM   allow         /usr/bin/runc
ig           containerd-shim  fanotify   FANOTIFY_EVENT_TYPE_PATH_PERM   na            /run/containerd/io.containerd.runtime.v2.task/mob…
ig           containerd-shim  fa_resp    FANOTIFY_EVENT_TYPE_PATH_PERM   allow         /run/containerd/io.containerd.runtime.v2.task/mob…
ig           containerd-shim  fanotify   FANOTIFY_EVENT_TYPE_PATH_PERM   na            /usr/bin/runc
ig           containerd-shim  fa_resp    FANOTIFY_EVENT_TYPE_PATH_PERM   allow         /usr/bin/runc
ig           containerd-shim  fanotify   FANOTIFY_EVENT_TYPE_PATH_PERM   na            /usr/bin/runc
ig           containerd-shim  fa_resp    FANOTIFY_EVENT_TYPE_PATH_PERM   allow         /usr/bin/runc
ig           containerd-shim  fanotify   FANOTIFY_EVENT_TYPE_PATH_PERM   na            /usr/bin/runc
ig           containerd-shim  fa_resp    FANOTIFY_EVENT_TYPE_PATH_PERM   allow         /usr/bin/runc
```

## Architecture

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    box Programs
        participant Tracer
        participant Tracee
    end
    box Maps
        participant fsnotify_insert_event_ctx
        participant enriched_fsnotify_events
        participant fsnotify_remove_first_event_ctx
        participant events ring buffer
    end

alt inotify
    Note over Tracee: kprobe/inotify_handle_inode_event
    Activate Tracee
        rect rgba(0, 0, 255, .1)
        Tracee ->> fsnotify_insert_event_ctx: insert into hash table<br/>Key: pid<br/>Value: {type=inotify, ino=123...}
        Activate fsnotify_insert_event_ctx
    end
else fanotify
    Note over Tracee: kprobe/fanotify_handle_event
    rect rgba(0, 0, 255, .1)
        Tracee ->> fsnotify_insert_event_ctx: insert into hash table<br/>Key: pid<br/>Value: {type=fanotify, ino=123...}
    end
end

    Note over Tracee: kprobe/fsnotify_insert_event<br/>Input: struct fsnotify_group *group, struct fsnotify_event *event
    Activate Tracee
    rect rgba(0, 0, 255, .1)
        Tracee ->> fsnotify_insert_event_ctx: lookup from hash table<br/>Key: pid<br/>Value: {type, ino...}
        Tracee ->> enriched_fsnotify_events: insert into hash table<br/>Key: fsnotify_event<br/>Value: {filename, tracee_comm, ...}
        Activate enriched_fsnotify_events
    end
    Deactivate Tracee

alt inotify
    Note over Tracee: kretprobe/inotify_handle_inode_event
    rect rgba(0, 0, 255, .1)
        Tracee ->> fsnotify_insert_event_ctx: delete entry from hash table<br/>Key: pid
    end
else fanotify
    Note over Tracee: kretprobe/fanotify_handle_event
    rect rgba(0, 0, 255, .1)
        Tracee ->> fsnotify_insert_event_ctx: delete entry from hash table<br/>Key: pid
        Deactivate fsnotify_insert_event_ctx
    end
end
    Deactivate Tracee

    Note over Tracer: kprobe/fsnotify_remove_first_event<br/>Input: struct fsnotify_group *group
    Activate Tracer
    rect rgba(0, 0, 255, .1)
        Tracer ->> fsnotify_remove_first_event_ctx: insert into hash table<br/>Key: pid<br/>Value: fsnotify_group pointer
        Activate fsnotify_remove_first_event_ctx
    end

    Note over Tracer: kretprobe/fsnotify_remove_first_event<br/>Returns: struct fsnotify_event *event
    rect rgba(0, 0, 255, .1)
        Tracer ->> fsnotify_remove_first_event_ctx: lookup+delete from hash table<br/>Key: pid
        Deactivate fsnotify_remove_first_event_ctx
        Tracer ->> enriched_fsnotify_events: lookup from hash table<br/>Key: fsnotify_event<br/>Value: {filename, tracee_comm, ...}
        Tracer ->> events ring buffer: submit event to ring buffer<br/>type = fanotify | inotify
        Note over events ring buffer: Inspektor Gadget<br/>receives the event
    end
    Deactivate Tracer

    Note over Tracee: kprobe/fsnotify_destroy_event<br/>Input: struct fsnotify_group *group, struct fsnotify_event *event
    Activate Tracee
    rect rgba(0, 0, 255, .1)
        alt inotify or fanotify
        Note over events ring buffer: Nothing to send
        else fanotify_perm_response
        Tracee ->> events ring buffer: submit event to ring buffer<br/>type = fanotify_perm_response
        Note over events ring buffer: Inspektor Gadget<br/>receives the event
        end
        Tracee ->> enriched_fsnotify_events: delete from hash table<br/>Key: fsnotify_event
        Deactivate enriched_fsnotify_events
    end
    Deactivate Tracee
```

Commit message:

docs: Update fsnotify gadget description and Add use cases
Signed-off-by: ThePhatak <111195860+uddhavphatak@users.noreply.github.com>

gadgets/fsnotify/README.mdx, after:

---
title: fsnotify
sidebar_position: 0
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# fsnotify

The fsnotify gadget detects applications using inotify or fanotify and enriches the events with the process-related metadata.

## Description 

This gadget monitors filesystem events such as file creation, deletion, modification, or access in real time. It leverages Linux’s inotify interface to report these events across containers and hosts, providing deep visibility into file-level activity for both debugging and security purposes.

## Use Cases

### File Integrity Monitoring
- Detect unauthorized or unexpected changes to critical files or directories

### Cross-Container Visibility
- Monitor file access even when the accessing process is in a different container (e.g., shared volumes).

### Security Auditing
- Detect suspicious file activity such as tampering with binaries, config files, or secrets.

### Debugging & Troubleshooting
- Track which processes are modifying or reading specific files during runtime issues.

### Compliance
- Ensure sensitive files are not modified or accessed outside of approved workflows.

## Requirements

- Minimum Kernel Version : 5.4
- Minimum Kernel Version for the field 'i_ino' : 5.11.

## Getting started

Running the gadget:

<Tabs groupId="env">
    <TabItem value="kubectl-gadget" label="kubectl gadget">
        ```bash
        $ kubectl gadget run ghcr.io/inspektor-gadget/gadget/fsnotify:%IG_TAG% [flags]
        ```
    </TabItem>

    <TabItem value="ig" label="ig">
        ```bash
        $ sudo ig run ghcr.io/inspektor-gadget/gadget/fsnotify:%IG_TAG% [flags]
        ```
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>
## Flags

### `--fanotify-only`

Show only fanotify events

Default value: ""

### `--inotify-only`

Show only inotify events

Default value: ""

### `--tracee-pid`

Show only fsnotify events generated by processes with this pid

Default value: ""

### `--tracer-group`

Show only fsnotify events generated by a struct fsnotify_group with this address. You can find this address in Golang with kfilefields.ReadPrivateDataFromFd(). See https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/inspektor-gadget/inspektor-gadget/pkg/kfilefields#ReadPrivateDataFromFd

Default value: ""

### `--tracer-pid`

Show only fsnotify events generated for processes with this pid

Default value: ""

## Guide

### Example with inotify

Start an application using inotify:
```bash
inotifywatch /tmp/
```

You can generate events in another terminal with:
```bash
touch /tmp/ABCDE
```

The fsnotify gadget can observe and enrich the inotify events in the following way:
```bash
$ sudo ig run ghcr.io/inspektor-gadget/gadget/fsnotify:%IG_TAG% --inotify-only --fields=tracer_comm,tracee_comm,i_mask,name
TRACER_COMM    TRACEE_COMM   I_MASK      NAME
inotifywatch   touch         0x8000020   ABCDE
inotifywatch   touch         0x8000004   ABCDE
inotifywatch   touch         0x8000008   ABCDE
```

The mask uses the same flags as inotify (`IN_ACCESS`, etc.) + some internal ones:
```bash
134217760 = 0x08000020 = FS_OPEN | FS_EVENT_ON_CHILD
134217732 = 0x08000004 = FS_ATTRIB | FS_EVENT_ON_CHILD
134217736 = 0x08000008 = FS_CLOSE_WRITE | FS_EVENT_ON_CHILD
```

### Example with fanotify

ig itself uses fanotify to watch containers. You can generate events in another terminal with:
```bash
docker run -ti --rm busybox date
```

The fsnotify gadget can observe and enrich the fanotify events in the following way:
```bash
$ sudo ig run ghcr.io/inspektor-gadget/gadget/fsnotify:%IG_TAG% --fanotify-only --fields=tracer_comm,tracee_comm,type,fa_type,fa_response,name
TRACER_COMM  TRACEE_COMM      TYPE       FA_TYPE                         FA_RESPONSE   NAME
ig           containerd-shim  fanotify   FANOTIFY_EVENT_TYPE_PATH_PERM   na            /usr/bin/runc
ig           containerd-shim  fa_resp    FANOTIFY_EVENT_TYPE_PATH_PERM   allow         /usr/bin/runc
ig           containerd-shim  fanotify   FANOTIFY_EVENT_TYPE_PATH_PERM   na            /run/containerd/io.containerd.runtime.v2.task/mob…
ig           containerd-shim  fa_resp    FANOTIFY_EVENT_TYPE_PATH_PERM   allow         /run/containerd/io.containerd.runtime.v2.task/mob…
ig           containerd-shim  fanotify   FANOTIFY_EVENT_TYPE_PATH_PERM   na            /usr/bin/runc
ig           containerd-shim  fa_resp    FANOTIFY_EVENT_TYPE_PATH_PERM   allow         /usr/bin/runc
ig           containerd-shim  fanotify   FANOTIFY_EVENT_TYPE_PATH_PERM   na            /usr/bin/runc
ig           containerd-shim  fa_resp    FANOTIFY_EVENT_TYPE_PATH_PERM   allow         /usr/bin/runc
ig           containerd-shim  fanotify   FANOTIFY_EVENT_TYPE_PATH_PERM   na            /usr/bin/runc
ig           containerd-shim  fa_resp    FANOTIFY_EVENT_TYPE_PATH_PERM   allow         /usr/bin/runc
```

## Architecture

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    box Programs
        participant Tracer
        participant Tracee
    end
    box Maps
        participant fsnotify_insert_event_ctx
        participant enriched_fsnotify_events
        participant fsnotify_remove_first_event_ctx
        participant events ring buffer
    end

alt inotify
    Note over Tracee: kprobe/inotify_handle_inode_event
    Activate Tracee
        rect rgba(0, 0, 255, .1)
        Tracee ->> fsnotify_insert_event_ctx: insert into hash table<br/>Key: pid<br/>Value: {type=inotify, ino=123...}
        Activate fsnotify_insert_event_ctx
    end
else fanotify
    Note over Tracee: kprobe/fanotify_handle_event
    rect rgba(0, 0, 255, .1)
        Tracee ->> fsnotify_insert_event_ctx: insert into hash table<br/>Key: pid<br/>Value: {type=fanotify, ino=123...}
    end
end

    Note over Tracee: kprobe/fsnotify_insert_event<br/>Input: struct fsnotify_group *group, struct fsnotify_event *event
    Activate Tracee
    rect rgba(0, 0, 255, .1)
        Tracee ->> fsnotify_insert_event_ctx: lookup from hash table<br/>Key: pid<br/>Value: {type, ino...}
        Tracee ->> enriched_fsnotify_events: insert into hash table<br/>Key: fsnotify_event<br/>Value: {filename, tracee_comm, ...}
        Activate enriched_fsnotify_events
    end
    Deactivate Tracee

alt inotify
    Note over Tracee: kretprobe/inotify_handle_inode_event
    rect rgba(0, 0, 255, .1)
        Tracee ->> fsnotify_insert_event_ctx: delete entry from hash table<br/>Key: pid
    end
else fanotify
    Note over Tracee: kretprobe/fanotify_handle_event
    rect rgba(0, 0, 255, .1)
        Tracee ->> fsnotify_insert_event_ctx: delete entry from hash table<br/>Key: pid
        Deactivate fsnotify_insert_event_ctx
    end
end
    Deactivate Tracee

    Note over Tracer: kprobe/fsnotify_remove_first_event<br/>Input: struct fsnotify_group *group
    Activate Tracer
    rect rgba(0, 0, 255, .1)
        Tracer ->> fsnotify_remove_first_event_ctx: insert into hash table<br/>Key: pid<br/>Value: fsnotify_group pointer
        Activate fsnotify_remove_first_event_ctx
    end

    Note over Tracer: kretprobe/fsnotify_remove_first_event<br/>Returns: struct fsnotify_event *event
    rect rgba(0, 0, 255, .1)
        Tracer ->> fsnotify_remove_first_event_ctx: lookup+delete from hash table<br/>Key: pid
        Deactivate fsnotify_remove_first_event_ctx
        Tracer ->> enriched_fsnotify_events: lookup from hash table<br/>Key: fsnotify_event<br/>Value: {filename, tracee_comm, ...}
        Tracer ->> events ring buffer: submit event to ring buffer<br/>type = fanotify | inotify
        Note over events ring buffer: Inspektor Gadget<br/>receives the event
    end
    Deactivate Tracer

    Note over Tracee: kprobe/fsnotify_destroy_event<br/>Input: struct fsnotify_group *group, struct fsnotify_event *event
    Activate Tracee
    rect rgba(0, 0, 255, .1)
        alt inotify or fanotify
        Note over events ring buffer: Nothing to send
        else fanotify_perm_response
        Tracee ->> events ring buffer: submit event to ring buffer<br/>type = fanotify_perm_response
        Note over events ring buffer: Inspektor Gadget<br/>receives the event
        end
        Tracee ->> enriched_fsnotify_events: delete from hash table<br/>Key: fsnotify_event
        Deactivate enriched_fsnotify_events
    end
    Deactivate Tracee
```
